welcome scaminati so glad to have you
here
um it's such a treat because
um I've been kind of checking out the
abtec Aboriginal territories in
cyberspace um because I'm a little bit
of like a second life history nerd and
um you know so it was just so much fun
to you know be in conversation with you
before this this Festival I'm so glad
you're here today thank you it's
wonderful to be here I heard you already
introduced me yes I did
I wanted to I wanted to listen to your
pronunciation remember we went over that
oh yes and I'm glad you weren't I'm glad
you weren't there at the beginning
because I like jumbled my words I was
talking too fast and had to go back but
I got it I got it I think
awesome
so I have a presentation I'm going to
share my screen
sorry I'm new to this platform so I'm
just taking a second for some reason I
don't know what's oh
there we go I just wasn't clicking right
so you have to see the whole inner
workings not the nice presentation but
everyone here can deal with that I think
we like the messy edges nothing ever we
don't need to put everything in a nice
clean white box here at gray area
Festival
yeah I mean even for that and that I
should even have my anyway I have my so
first I usually say Sega it's going on
to eujits hi everyone my name is Scott
anadi and I would like to say thank you
to you Wade for inviting me to be part
of the gray area festival and the show
diorama I also want to thank Sammy whose
last name I did not take the time to
find out I'm sorry but Demi healer
that's Sammy vieler everybody
Sammy uh installed all the work and so I
really appreciate that and the work that
they did with me so now we'll go after
that
and I also like to say
um when I'm in a room with people or if
I can see them but I know you're there
somewhere
that I acknowledge and address the
original inhabitants of the territories
we are all joining in from and I want to
say to you that your existence is
existence
I greet you and I'm happy that you are
here with me
I am World Builder
the title of my talk and I'm going to be
telling you today about uh creating the
indigenous future on aptic island and
Turtle Island which for those of you who
don't already know where have you been
Turtle Island is what most people call
North America these days and you want to
know something I think Turtle Island is
the entire world and I will tell you why
in this presentation
so perhaps Wade mentioned abtech well he
mentioned while I was already on
um Aboriginal territories in cyberspace
is a research creation Network that I
co-founded with my partner and husband
now Jason Edward Lewis
uh and our goal is was is and was to
ensure that indigenous people basically
showed up in cyberspace we wanted to
make sure that we were using these tools
these brand new tools this is like you
know
we've had yeah I'm talking more about
that too uh but I want to keep it quick
so
one of our major projects is called the
initiative for indigenous Futures so
with Aboriginal territories in
cyberspace we're really talking about
indigenous people using new technologies
but we realized that the technology
could be seen as a metaphor for the
future just of Aboriginal people
indigenous people being in the future
and by the way I use indigenous
Aboriginal First Nations Native American
way and all the other ones Indian uh
interchangeably pretty much
okay
this is my avatar xox and a piece I call
she's dancing with herself uh she's a
second life Avatar I love her
um and I wanted to tell you that I
haven't I didn't always look this good
back in the day
there was the palace and if I was with
you I would ask for a show of hands of
who remembers the palace Wade
any memory or knowledge of the palace
yeah awesome and so back then uh you
know the default Avatar and for the most
part most people's avatars was just the
smiley face this hat this smiley face
and you know we felt very lucky that we
could change the you know eyes to X's or
a sad face or whatever and then
eventually we could put little hats on
our avatars and eventually we could
totally customize them
um but all that was to just say I I've
been around I've been around uh the
virtual worlds for a while now and I
started World building if you will in
1996 when I conceived a cyber powwow
which is a project I did as part of a
collective a First Nations artist
Collective called Nation to nation and
this project itself merits an hour-long
presentation pretty much so I won't talk
about it too much but I just wanted to
you know give you a time show about what
it looked like and what kind of Worlds
we were making but the idea was again
that indigenous people this was called
an i called you know the tagline was an
Aboriginal territory in cyberspace and
this was one of the first forays into
that new territory that myself and other
artists entered into and there on the
screen can you see my cursor xox I've
always been xox and there she is there I
am dressed as tank girl dressed as an
Indian I love it
so
I think everyone in this crowd probably
knows what the word Machinima means uh
but I leave the slide in there so that I
can let you know that I make Machinima
exclusively in Second Life
um and that the work in the show diorama
I'm calling a slice of Skyworld and it's
based on a set I made with my team from
abtech uh for the movie The Machinima
she falls for ages
so what I thought I would do is just run
through what she falls for ages looks
like it is about I'm not going to play
the video because
um I was thinking this was zoom and zoom
always massacres my videos so um I
thought I would just show you still
images of she floss for ages but I do
have a little tiny one minute video that
we're gonna try looking at later which I
hear in the technical uh run through it
looked pretty good so I'm hoping
so
um
let me just skip this slide here
oh I love that illustration
Celestial tree yeah that's really nice
it is by Erica pero she's on she was a
former graphic designer on our team and
I love it too I I just love it and
you'll see you I show this on purpose
because I loved it so much that I it
went it went places but first I'll tell
you the story of she falls for ages
she falls for ages as a Sci-Fi retelling
of the hadina Joni or Iroquois creation
story
in that story it you know traditionally
maybe I should go back here
traditionally the story takes place
you know it's it always takes place in
Skyworld you know a place beyond the
heavens it always has a tree a special
tree that is uprooted
and the hole left behind
is
there's a well there's always a pregnant
woman and the pregnant woman falls or
you know otherwise
goes through the hole okay and lands on
an earth still covered in water
and the animals that are there already
help her to create the Earth as we know
it
so what I wanted to do
um is I wanted to end this story when
I've heard it before is traditionally
told like you know sky world is
basically pre-contact iroquoia like the
houses are all long houses made of bark
and trees you know that the people wear
Buckskin clothing or whatever hide you
know skin animal skin clothing and uh
you know they use clay pots all that
stuff I thought you know if it's beyond
the sky maybe it's another planet and
wouldn't it be awesome wouldn't it be
awesome if they were like this
technologically advanced people and they
were like these wonderful you know
peaceful people who live sustainably and
and have you know figured out how to
have technology and and be in harmony
with their planet
so um that's what I did that's what I
did I I
created this world sky world my sky
world
and here's the celestial tree in the IU
consult um a consult
you know Elders knowledge Keepers and
books to um to get my to do my research
to base my story and so the tree in one
of the older one of the older versions
there's many versions of this story but
in one of them it says the blossom it's
blossoms light the world
and so this is why I made this tree with
the glowing blossoms but I also decided
that this tree was actually cultivated
by the people of Skyworld over thousands
of years and that they were brilliant
botanists and they figured out how to
make a luminescent tree that could light
that could be there an energy basically
an energy producing tree that could
that's that's their source of energy on
the planet
so in the story I do a little bit of
backstory and we see Sky woman the
pregnant woman who will later be going
through the hole as a child with her
family and this is also based on I
didn't make any of this up like they're
supposed to have like special powers so
I made her a telepath and a tele and her
brother's a telekinetic and they're
secluded from birth until they finally
are summoned by the guardian of the
celestial tree oh this is this is cut
out a little bit here we go
um
to a dream guessing feast
and um when she goes there I add you
know they fall in love I mean they do
get in the old stories they get married
but no one ever talks about love in fact
in some of the stories most a very
popular version of the story he's this
Tyrant and he actually pushes her
through the hole and I was like that's
another big change that I want to make
to the story I was like you know I don't
want you know
I want I don't want to see her as a
victim scholar as a victim and I don't
want to see Sky Woman as a clumsy person
who's another story she just like falls
through this big hole
I wanted to see her as choosing
to jump and to be basically the seed of
the new world
um
anyway I don't have to tell you this
part so she lands on this earth covered
in water onto this turtle
and like the story these water animals
the beaver otter and uh muskrat are
there to help her uh or you know and
they
so they go and they get some Earth for
her and bring it to her and in
combination with some of the seeds she's
brought from her world uh and the dance
and ritual she dances on the back of the
turtle that begins to grow and grow and
grow until it becomes as they say Turtle
Island and this is why I think Turtle
Island must be Pangea the original
supercontinent and not just North
America
so and it's not just me who thinks that
I've heard it from other people as well
but very popularly you're going to hear
it's just Turtle it's just North America
so uh so this is the this is where the
sky world what you're seeing in diorama
is the celestial tree
uh and then it's surrounded by these
canisters or Vats I never we never named
them when we made them actually but you
see inside of them the the blossom
rotating as though it was being formed
in a lab
and I try to also the if you saw the
picture of Skyworld the atmosphere uh is
pink which you don't see very well but
you can see here a little bit that the
sky is actually pink
um and another little detail about
Skyworld is I wanted it's not explicit
but I wanted to make it
how do you say post or pre or other than
race no race and by that and the way I
did that is that I I made the people
these six different bright colors that
no matter how you mix like and basically
so here's a mom and her two kids no
matter what color person she mated with
to produce these children there's no
mixing of any colors that would come out
pink so that's what I want to do is like
imagine like the that The Offspring of
these unions were not based on the color
of the parents
anyway so it's very based on skin colors
what I was trying to think about a
little bit too
and so I'm telling you all this because
oh wait one more slide uh she you know
she finally
she ends with the first one of the first
foods on planet Earth supposedly is was
the sunflower
uh and so
you can watch the actual video which is
20 minutes long on scavenotting.com
and then I wanted to show you
a prequel that I made I was asked to
make a very short video like a one
minute video with no
uh dialogue and so I imagined
that so in the world I I think I forgot
to say that um in the story The their
planet is dying Skyworld is actually
dying that's why she has to go through
through the you know to the other world
to Earth and start again there's you
know but um and so it and you know
that's how the story and my story ends
but then I thought what if they figured
out a way they're so bright maybe they
figured out a way to save the planet and
ever since then they have been looking
for Sky woman and her descendants and so
this is uh this is what
happened okay when they find her now
I've gotta unshare
and re-share
so I can do this properly
oh I'm so excited just one minute I hope
I don't disappoint you
it's very simple
okay
I think it should work
[Music]
all right
foreign
[Music]
share thingy so I got a few more slides
that was wonderful and I love that in
the credits you have the you have the
exact second like location tag marked
um that was cute
yeah yeah I think it's yeah thanks I'm
glad you think that
so World building
one of the things that
um world building as it were and I think
the way we've been talking about it Wade
you know making these worlds in
cyberspace uh you know I've been doing
it as a I used to I was thinking of it
as play a lot of the time kind of like
Barbie play you know doll houses and
that kind of thing but slowly very
slowly over these last 25 years
I started to realize that what we do in
cyberspace can affect the real world and
more so that the stuff I'm making in
cyberspace are starting to have
expressions in the AFK away from
keyboard world and so one of the things
um that I made I was asked to do a
public art sculpture a very happy
commissioned by
um curator Charleston from uh DC uh
sorry no it's now it's called Uh found
fly Foundation here in Montreal to do a
piece uh on the street
and uh I I did a a street sign of the
celestial tree so this is made to be
like it's exactly the same diameter uh
the post is the same timer as a stop
sign here in Montreal and the colored
decals that I've put on are the same
stuff that a stop sign is made out of
and so I imagine like what could it be
like to have the celestial tree as as a
signage in our world what would that
mean and how would it feel and so it was
very exciting for me to to make that in
real life this is something unfortunate
I didn't have a good screen shot of this
item which is in the movie she falls for
ages but uh it was just a it's just
another example of something that was
hanging it was hanging in as decoration
and it's of course referencing our
wampum belts uh Iroquois wampum belts
but in a circular format which usually
of course they're linear horizontal
and then I did a cosplay of Sky woman so
yeah
with my amazing team we made this
costume which consists of the Gown
including
um this big color that we were able to
embroider using a special Tajima machine
you know one of the women on the team
picks the hair we bought a white wig and
we bought these little thingies and
she's like spray painted I don't even
know what she did it was so amazing
um we made a we made a 3D we 3D modeled
the necklace that she wears in the show
and uh yeah and so it's just like and
now this piece this the dress and all
that except so without me she I bought a
Pink pregnant mannequin and they are on
display in Holland
the Netherlands yes so yeah it's very
exciting and I think that that's um
that's one of the things that uh
I think of now is building is like
actually affecting this world
so how are we doing for time because I
added some extra slides just in case but
I
I can stop now too broke handtime if you
want to keep going go for it we got
about 10 more minutes okay so this
project is is called skins and I want to
explain that Aboriginal territories in
cyberspace does a bunch of things
besides helping me make my art
um we also run this program called skins
which is a series of workshops to teach
indigenous youth how to make Machinima
or video games or a range of other
um basically habit but not just how to
make the things but how to use our how
to tell our stories and use our stories
in these new technologies
um and so
we've made oh there's me this is many
moons ago when I had like long dark hair
teaching the youth how to do it I love
that picture so I keep it in there but
we've made it these views that we've met
in these workshops we've made a number
of um
a number of machinimas so this is one is
called the modem from the Native youth
program in month in uh at the Museum of
anthropology and UBC
and same program so queer I'm sorry I
haven't I don't have the the sizes right
here
we go
and then more recently we made oh I
forgot one anyway how the Loon got its
walk anyway these are just a tiny
sampling of of some of the machinimas
and some of the projects I wanted to
tell you that we do that and I want to
explain to you that it's partly because
of that
um and of course my making machinim is
that we you know we have an island in
Second Life we have you know we we never
retire of being amused by the idea that
real Indians pay real money for virtual
land but we do
every six months and
um what we've done there in addition to
hosting some workshops and having my
machine sets because we've created a
place where people can hang out and um
and come in like so you know we want to
invite the students but really anyone
the participants of the workshops I
should say we want to invite them to
come back to be in relationship with us
and to keep learning their skills to
keep you know whatever so we're like you
can come to Second Life and you you know
we'll show you how to how to whatever
further customize your avatar or how to
build something or import something
um but uh we weren't getting a lot of
people coming so what we started to do
is we actually have a time once a week
where AB Tech staff are on in world so
that they can you know really
um really
there's just a special you know one
specific time so we don't have to like
worry about catching someone or making
appointments and so I wanted to invite
everyone here to come visit us on
Wednesday afternoons Eastern Standard
Time at 1 30 if they would like to have
a tour of the island or if they would
like help with their avatars you know
the friendly folks there will uh will
answer your questions and hang out with
you if you like or leave you alone if
you prefer that but uh that's also um in
the show diorama that is uh where you
are linked to so you can go
um from the lobby and my canister in the
lobby to the room with the tree and the
more canisters my personal rooms and
then from there you can go on to abject
Island
and see that and one last thing oh no
there's two more slides here
we've got uh I just wanted to give you a
real life view of my avatar
and an ad Tech staff member all the ad
Tech staff member wear the uniform so
you can recognize them and their first
name is Abby we were talking to this
scary Avatar named Alma and they were
very interested in talking about the
significance of of digital artifacts in
world so it was a pretty high level
conversation which we're also up for but
we also can just hang out
and most recently I'm very excited I
don't have lots of slides to show you
but we opened during covid and because
of covid we opened a gallery and so
we've already had like four or even five
shows uh and it's really exciting uh
this show a thread that never breaks was
meant to be a real life show of textiles
indigenous textile artists in Toronto
um and you know I know the curators and
they contact me and said look you know
we don't know what to do we we really
want to have this show but we can't you
can't do it anymore do you have any
ideas you know you don't think we really
want a web page like they had some idea
that I did something in Virtual Worlds
but they weren't really sure what that
even meant you know and so I when I
showed them this they were like yes we
want to do this and so we transmediated
all these textile works and and they're
in the show and we have a website which
I'm sorry I don't actually I believe you
go to indigenous Futures it's hard to
find sorry but I'll you know eventually
I'll get that into this presentation
six times for more information
and
[Music]
meow that's the end of my I I can you
know I can just talk and talk and I
didn't set my timer so I don't know
where we're at so well don't worry
because I can talk and talk too and I
have so many I have like hundreds and
thousands of questions for you
um based on this but before I get to
answer my ask my questions I want to ask
a question that came from the audience
um Auto Art machine asks how do you see
the relationship between the VR worlds
of the 90s and early 2000s and the
Contemporary Resurgence and I actually
have this question too because like
Second Life how really how to PK day you
know between I think it was like 2006 to
2008 was like Heyday and second life
um and since then you know we discussed
before there's like a or no I was
talking I forget who told me this but
there's something like 30 000 or 300 000
like static users who are like still on
the platform and like but it really
hasn't had any major like growth or drop
off from that static number since like
2011 or something so yeah I'm very
curious about you know how you feel you
know using this platform that
um
is is quite singular in that way
well uh so I think so aside from Second
Life which I'll talk about in a second
in case the the questioner was asking
about in general you know um at the time
that I jumped on the bandwagon um it
wasn't a very big bandwagon but it was
yeah people were seriously talking about
like it was like just the palace was
like insanely
Cutting Edge it was it was like it was
like the future okay I mean to be able
to see one another even though I mean
now look what we're doing this is every
day we're so used to this and so nothing
but I mean just to see a representation
of ourselves even though it was a happy
face you know via our computers like
that
was astounding and the thought that we
could customize that area was also
astounding and at that time I don't know
the aid the Oscar you know what I
understood to be going on was that the
internet was going to come and it was
going to make our lives better it was
going to be an information sharing
platform
it is it is but you know it was it was
going to somehow
not be what it is today it was not going
to be a place where we would be we would
become the consumed you know if that I I
mean I thought we were gonna we were
gonna bypass consumerism all together
with this internet thing right back then
but instead what has happened is we did
not know how to you know
leave behind capitalism and consumerism
and in fact what's happened is now our
privacy has threatened Our lives our
data is mined you know and and so that's
what I see the difference as the
difference between late 90s and now uh
in the internet and and and I'm honestly
not sure how much longer I'm gonna stay
I mean I know and so back to Second Life
um love second life as soon as I saw it
because
now I have a whole body I have boobs
like I mean come on it's great you know
but
um and and that you know Second Life
disappointed me too I think you know I
think they I think they might have been
going in the wrong anyway they were
going to I think they're going One
Direction at first and then I think I
believe what happened is they found you
know a lot of their users were
I don't know let me put it this way
here I am being in Second Life making
this first Machinima that I made time
traveler Tien
now I I bet a lot of you listeners know
the novel Snow Crash by Neil Stevenson
and Snow Crash talks about the metaverse
and a lot of people say that the creator
of Second Life Red Snow Crash and said
I'm gonna make that and made secondly
and so in that book okay
they talk about how the metaverse was
good but only got really good only
became like the platform where everyone
actually did business and had
relationships and lived when facial
expressions were perfected okay so now
here I am in Second Life and I'm making
these machinimas and I have to contend
with nine facial expressions only which
are like these grimaces or like very
exaggerated looks right and they keep
every time I log in they say coming soon
an incredible feature coming soon big
wonderful thing and I'm like I'm saying
to my team oh my God it's going to be
facial expression questions can't wait
I finally the day arrives
and what is the new feature
boob jiggle
and
that I almost left that day I I was so
disappointed I was terribly disappointed
anyway I didn't leave you know it's like
a marriage I'm married to Second Life
until Second Life dies I'm only gonna be
with second life I'm not gonna do
another I'm not gonna it I put in so
much energy into into learning and
molding second life into my desired
imagery that I'm not like I'm not
leaving
but um you know and either I run out of
Machinima ideas or second life stops
being that's that's how it'll that's how
it's gonna go and then I think I might
you know yeah then I'll just start
making more stuff in the in you know the
so-called real world which I am loving
the I put this book nearby so I could
talk about AFK
as in yeah away from keyboard world
because it is real of course we're in
the real world when we're in the virtual
world it's just another part of it it's
just an extension I'm so glad you said
that because that is like this is like
oh my gosh nobody ever says that and I
have this like that is like I I
um one of my favorite Scholars is uh Tom
belsorff who is an Anthropologist of
Second Life
um and he wrote um an ethnography of
second life and he was studying the
different communities and how it worked
and bringing doing this really you know
fabulous anthropological survey also of
the tech company as well that was part
of it like London Labs was you know you
know he was doing the online and the
offline it was this really holistic
study and that's kind of the first thing
he says in his book is that you know the
virtual is not reducible to the real the
virtual is reducible to the actual and I
think that's like a dynamic that we have
to really consider particularly in
thinking about worlding because what you
do online is not like not unreal you
know we may create renders in something
called Unreal Engine but you know that
it's not it isn't unreal it just seems
unreal you know what you do in a virtual
world affects the person on the other
side of the computer just the same as if
I'm you know what's happened we're
having a conversation you know
um and this it's all virtual
um and
you know I I've been you know in
thinking you know the that description
of the metaverse in snow crash you know
always you know really resonated with me
as well you know that was something that
I've always been looking for and I study
Virtual Worlds and I research Virtual
Worlds and that's kind of my my personal
interest and background and you know
when I first stumbled upon VR chat for
the first time it gave me that same
feeling I think that you described going
into second life I was like oh my God I
can embody myself as any Avatar I want
you literally like it's so physicalized
you literally walk through portals and
Rez up in a new world and I was like
this is it I was like and because you
know second life has a voice as well but
the way that like you know and speaking
of the facial expressions on you know
and a lot of you are things that will
get your it'll your avatar will be
programmed for the mouse the mouth to
move when you're talking and it just
feels so rich and embodied
um but I've been on VR chat it's still
in this this game has been a beta phase
for like five years now
um it's has a it has a somewhat stagnant
user base it you know the same worlds
are being promoted all the time and like
you can go and you can search and you
can find things because the cool thing
about it is anybody can
who anybody working in unity can upload
their files to it like it's totally
Unity compatible and that's like a
really accessible thing for a lot of
young artists and so I see this really
Democratic potential to create whatever
you want and it's totally free it's on
you know on the you know second life you
have to purchase land but in VR chat
it's a free-for-all
you don't you don't actually I mean it
makes your life much easier it's just
like being a painter you can go paint on
Plein Air or you can have a studio oh
wait of course that's true that's true I
didn't think about it that way that's
totally true
um but no I think that you know I I
would let you know one day I'm gonna
have to like tempt you to do a little
bit of Tourism and come visit and I'll
take you on a little trip there someday
um maybe it'll change your mind about
just saying it's like in life um but um
but no I I I I love the commitment and I
love how beautiful the community is in
abtech
um you know the the programming is so
rich and it's such an amazing
opportunity for people all over the
world to connect with each other you
know across time and difference in
language and all different other sorts
of things
um
you know
I wanted to ask you you know about what
you're working on right now in any kind
of current particular interest I know we
just heard this amazing Rich mythology
about Sky worlds and about she falls for
ages but I'm wondering what kind of
stories you you know you still have that
you want to tell and you haven't been
able to yet
so glad you asked
I'm so excited about my current project
so you met my avatar xox I told you
about her well she's showing up more and
more in my machinimas and xox
um
is gonna meet the queen
and so one of the real thing I can't
show you a picture I don't know how
picture prepared of a real item that I
made remember talked about wampum belts
I think you know a lot of people don't
know what they are but there's something
I'm trying to find a picture or a thing
right now but I can't anyway imagine
long tubular beads
all sort of strung together I'm I'm
actually here I'm making one
this is this is the beginning of one
foreign
so this is the loom
these are these are um I have a long ah
anyway
so it would go this way
it would be seen across and these this
little line of stuff right here is um
are the beads and they'll be full
there'll be a full you know imagery
and uh what so
I mean I sort of started I should should
I should have started with the story but
anyway I'll start with the punch line so
this is the this is the wampum belt that
I'm going to be making now this is my
avatar in case you couldn't tell I hope
you can and this is the queen Queen
Elizabeth
and what they have here uh is a a famous
wampum belt so there's a welcome inside
the Wampum which makes me very excited
it's like diorama it's like exactly
exactly
so uh this is this is one just this is
one sketch you know but I made a few
I've made a number of sketches but um
so the story yeah and like so I God I
don't know where to begin it'll take me
20 minutes to tell you the whole thing
so I can't tell you everything but
basically xox is gonna visit the queen
she's gonna tell the queen dude you do
not get to wash your hands of the mess
you made in North America
all right and you're still one of the
richest people in the world so you're
gonna put some money towards fixing this
problem at the very least and she's
she's gonna make a suggestion she's
gonna be nice I'm just gonna be polite
but she's gonna be very clear you know
you can put money towards language
revitalization because that is there I
I've been taking language classes of my
mother's mother tongue
and you know I see the incredible work
that people are doing everyone's doing
to revitalize the language and and the
lack of curriculum and how money
money can help people to learn like it
it is needed to create curriculum to
hire people to hire people just to learn
the language to hire people to go to
school
you know and to develop to develop
protocols for translation and to
translate text into gungeon to translate
into English you know there's so much
work to be done and that takes money and
she's got some so I think it's time
so that's what is going to happen uh
that's what I'm working on now and so
I'm I have a show and there's so much
more to to tell you about
but I I think it'll take a lot of time
so I just I was worried about taking up
too much time you know no never
um no we're so no this is so wonderful
um you know because and I think that I
love
your use of the I love your use of
Machinima as your tool as your tool for
this
um and I'm wondering what about this
particular medium
is what about this particular medium
speaks to you and what about this
particular medium this mode of
filmmaking
um connects to the ideas that you're
trying to get across through through the
cinema yeah thanks thanks for
there's two things so I
think first of all
like I watch Like many we watch films
you know and when I have like I I have a
limited I have an idea of how a film is
made it takes so much people so many
people so much money so many resources
um you know when I made time traveler TM
the main character wears a jet pack and
flies around and I was like I was I had
written that story way before I met
Second Life
and so you know I'm wondering like how
am I gonna do this this is going to be
an animation a 3D animation you know I
knew I wanted to look kind of like a
video game but then someone shows me
second life and I'm like you can fly
you know it was just so obvious it was I
felt like I could do it by myself I
could you can just fall you can almost
make a mission by yourself I I can't
don't I can't I have help I have amazing
amazing help people that I I are
precious to me especially shout out
Nathan and Shirley I gotta say Nancy
because this person this woman has just
found like she just knows how to
troubleshoot you know every like she's
figured out so many she could write a
manual for people but I won't but she
won't because I need her to work with me
not writing manual for anybody
but it's just so great so anyhow that
that's one thing okay that's that's one
of the things it there's a DIY aspect to
it there's a there's a uh I remember I
was in the palace oh remember I was in
the past I remember I played with
Barbies and still do so when I saw when
I met check in life I was like it's the
palace with it's Barbie and the palace
together it's their child so I was just
you know it just was very it was not
like a movie a live-action movie to me
which seemed I didn't even know how to
begin it was like oh all I have to do is
figure out how to use a camera how to
capture the screen I mean it was very
hard it took seven years to make
to make like the first episode is that
that can't be true two years anyway it
took forever to make time travel time
seven years for the whole thing
and wow yeah what a journey too like in
learning this medium and figuring it out
and like you know we've been talking a
lot today about
um how we can use technology to reclaim
our agency particularly in situations
where it seems like we may not have
agency where there's some sort of
protocol whether it be algorithmic or
software you know however whichever way
um and it just it it it feels very it
feels like a really like the liberatory
potential feels really rich
um and I mean it seemed to be so for for
you
thing that I was going to say about
second life and why
and what like the future right and so I
mean actually the so did the palace but
like to me using seclight second life is
the medium is the message like I want to
show indigenous people thriving in the
future and what better medium to show us
in one where we can fly and teleport and
you know just be and be fabulous you
know as Fabulous As we want to be so
yeah it's it's really it was the right
fit for me for for a long time like I
don't think of myself as a Machinima
artist I don't think of myself as a new
media artist I think of myself as an
artist who uses the right you know
hopefully the right medium for the
message you know it's just I've not I've
not gotten tired of this I've CA I feel
like I still have stuff to say with with
this particular medium
That's so exciting and I'm so excited to
hear what all the things you have to say
through those works as they kind of come
out in the next couple years
um you know just to you know we don't
we're running a little bit out of time
but I wanted to you know just to connect
back to some of the ideas that we've
been talking about you know this weekend
um you know we we heard from logina
McMillan earlier today who shared the
black movement Library where she's
archiving
um black dance and choreography we also
heard from am dark who's working on an
open source afro hair 3D Library
um and you know there's a lot of you
know I'm wondering how you tackle the
role of representation and appropriation
in Virtual spaces you know I think that
it's like so important that indigenous
people have agency in these spaces and
are able to represent themselves but I
also understand you know I just you know
this I was on Steam the other day and
this game came up that was just like
it's you know you put it's it's marketed
towards you know kind of like why gamer
guys and it's you're playing Native
American person and in and I just was
seeing this and I was like huh this is
icky and I wanted to ask you about this
like how do we deal with you know these
issues of like identity tourism or
appropriation of indigenous culture and
Virtual Worlds and you know how do you
how do you navigate that
well it's been a problem since like it's
been a question since the very beginning
like since since cyber powwow right
at that time people were like how are we
gonna know who's really indigenous
you know we're just wearing these happy
faces and I was like
I don't know can we just try this let's
just try this before we just say like
we're not gonna do it because we might
not know who's wearing the you know the
Avatar and what happened was we got in
there and like everyone was like hello
you know it's all typing right hello
hello
where are you from
Winnipeg
where are you from Toronto or whatever
you know and they're and they slowly
they're like wait a second I know you I
know you we already knew each other like
people who already knew each other
or these like less than six degrees of
separation they were able to identify
one another and feel very comfortable
and feel like they were in an indigenous
space
um you know what I think about the how I
navigate the problem is
I I have I feel again I feel I've gone
through a trajectory so I don't want to
dismiss this concern because it is one
but for myself
I think that
the problem does not come with digital
anything the problem exists anyway white
people pretend to be Indians
real people real AFK whatever you want
to call them you know and it's a problem
and it's a it's a really weird problem
and it's a heartbreaking problem in some
in some point aspects like there's
people who've done it and
they thought they they thought they were
indigenous it seems
like it's best up because they it shows
how little they know about indigeneity
to say that they're indigenous to say
that they have one great great great
great great great great great great
great grandmother who's indigenous so
they're indigenous it's like whoa
because you know
it's a it's a tough one it's a tough one
it's a big can of worms to be opening at
the end of the talk you know because
we lost so many people
you know we lost some people through
like
assimilation of course but like through
um
legislation that called the children of
indigenous people you know not
indigenous
and I I can go into more specifics but I
won't but please no audience that I know
there's more to it I'm saying I'm just
trying to say it a bit simply for time
purposes you know and so sometimes I
think like oh god well in specifically
in a piece I I'm imagining Indians in
the 20th century a piece I made in 2001
I thought imagine that had been switched
imagine all children who were you know
children of of uh indigenous people were
just indigenous not half indigenous or a
quarter or 16th but just indigenous
imagine this place would be full of
indigenous people
and they would know who they were
and they would know why we're so proud
of being indigenous and why we we
continue to resist assimilation we still
continue it today
you know
so
I don't
um
I don't worry
if that's the right word I don't I don't
worry about uh red face I feel like we
need to there's not I don't need I in my
practice do not need to
um take steps to make it stop happening
you know I think in the world
institutions need to take steps and
figure out they're all figuring it they
are trying to figure it out right now
these things are happening right now you
know they need to figure out how to not
hire white people with money you're
marked for indigenous people
absolutely absolutely that's a period
um you know
um just to add on a lighter note you
know I thought that was really important
to acknowledge and to to think through
but you know before we we close but I do
have one final question for you on a
more positive note um
what kind of cyberspace do you want to
see and how do you envision the future
of what cyberspace could look and could
feel like
I love that question
I mean you know in my mind it's very
close to what we see in Second Life and
maybe it is your VR chat that you're
talking about what I think second life
or sorry the virtual world that the
cyberspace that I want to see
what it would look like is that people
could have the bodies that they want
right
everything about that you know the hair
eyes gender skin color
clothing you know they could have what
they they could just present themselves
in the way that they want to be
presented and so that I see happen you
know happening we're really close like I
said in Second Life but like I like I
said you know unfortunately I feel that
there's there's still some things that
I'm getting at but you know like your
hands you know classic avatars can only
have hands that are like in three
positions and things like that
I mean
yeah I mean that's like that's you know
that's the look of it I mean the
cyberspace I want does not mine our our
data and does not infringe on our
privacy the cyberspace I want mirrors
the world that I want which is like I
and I I truly believe we can achieve
this but I just don't know when
but you know I think we had it before on
this continent we did have a a
non-consumerist way of living in a
sustainable way of living and I think it
can happen again and so to find a way
that cyberspace can do that to find a
way that the world can do that is is
what I'm is what I'm hoping will happen
in the future
sooner rather than later absolutely what
a beautiful vision and you know I'm
totally with you on on all of it
um thank you so much for being here this
is so fun
um I you know I'm definitely going to be
having a little Machinima movie marathon
tonight
um you know not that I've not seen them
all before I have
um
you're wonderful you're a wonderful
interlocutor if I'm saying that right
but I really appreciate you thank you so
much for inviting me yeah absolutely and
please everyone go to abtech.org
um you can check out Aboriginal
characters in cyberspace there's
beautiful instructions on the website
for how to get into second life you can
also enter via the new art City
Exhibition at www.newart.city
um and I you know I hope that you will
continue you know we were talking
earlier with am dark and her kind of you
know she said you know Point Blank give
money to black people you know please
give money to indigenous people support
indigenous communities support projects
like Skylanders this is how you can make
a difference and provide access to all
of these different Technologies and
stories that are clearly so rich and
necessary as we reimagine what our world
might look like so thank you so much
and I'll go away